Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Laura Betzig. She's a
PhD in anthropology at Northwestern University, and she's held
research and teaching positions at Northwestern, the University of
California, and the University of Michigan. And today we're
talking about her latest book, The Badge of Lost
Innocence, A History of the West. So, Doctor Betsy,
welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you very much.
So, in the book, you try to quote unquote
understand human history as natural history. Could you explain
that?
Yeah, um, I'm gonna start by asking you a
question.
OK.
Did you know that the vast majority of animals
in the vast majority of species are solitary, that
they live alone?
Uh, I don't think I was aware of that,
no. Sociality is super uncommon. Only about 3% of
all mammals and 9% of all bird species live
in groups. About 90 98% of species overall are
solitary. There are exceptions for small periods of time,
sexual organisms have to get together, and mothers and
young will stay together for short periods of time,
but most animals for most of the time, live
alone. Um, Any idea why that is?
Uh, I don't think so.
OK, well, uh, naturalists have thought about this for
a while, and one of the most obvious reasons
is that parasites love a crowd. If you're gonna
live alone, your parasite loads gonna go way down.
Another is that groups are more conspicuous to predators.
You're less likely to get picked off if you're
hiding it all by yourself and if you're trying
to hide with a bunch of other animals. Uh,
THE most important problem is that when you find
a good Spot with lots of good resources. You
can have it all to yourself if you're alone,
if you're in a group, you have to compete
for everything there. You have to compete for food
and water, you have to compete if you're a
sexual reproducer for mates. It's much easier to do
it yourself. So the next question is, Why does
anybody bother to live in groups all the time?
Why do we? We're obviously an extreme outlier. Uh,
WE not only are never an island, we live
in groups of, what's the population of India now?
1.5 billion. Pretty, pretty unparalleled. The, again, the answer
that naturalists have come up with is that where
it, where resources are patchy, where resources aren't evenly
distributed across space, um, Animals tend to clump. Um,
THE cost of leaving a good patch might be
high enough that you're willing to put up with
a little bit of bullying from somebody bigger and
stronger, uh, a smaller portion of a good piece
of fruit or a good piece of a carcass
is is worth more than Nothing. If, if, if
the, if the option is wandering off in the
desert or, or trying to get across the mountain.
And so, I, I mean, uh, the, in answering
my question, I, I mean, what after all of
that, what would you say then? I mean, what
is it to understand human history as natural history?
So, um. The first question is, if, if people
are animals, why do they live in groups? And
the answer again for across species is animals put
up with all the inherent costs of living in
groups because they find They clumped resources and they
clump around good resources, especially where there are barriers
to flight. If, if you're if you're on an
oasis and you're surrounded by desert, you end up
living in groups and you end up putting up
with inequality. The other important component of that argument,
history as natural history, is that inequality will increase
to the extent that the cost-benefit ratio goes up.
If, if the costs of escaping from that patch
are high enough, again, if you're surrounded by desert
or there's a big mountain range, can't get over,
um, the costs of leaving are high enough and
the benefits of staying are high enough because the
resources are very rich. Then you put up with
increasing inequality. Increasing variance in dominance and reproductive success,
which is as a natural historian would put it
about other organisms and is, and, and is how
I initially would have put it about people. There
are more, there's more political. There is political skill
and there's more skewing family size. Mhm.
But uh, I mean, in regards then to human
history, what is the premise of your book? What
do you try to, try to tackle here?
All right, good. So when I, when I started
looking at human histories, natural history, I was in
a natural history museum, um, I was surprised to
find that. People Like other animals do. Parallel Political
skew with reproductive skew. We live, we live in
a society where We pretty much expect everybody to
have. Similar reproductive opportunities and similar political opportunities. Uh,
OBVIOUSLY, we're flawed in both respects, but it's, it's
what we expect and um as I started to
read the anthropological record and um and then started
to read history, it became obvious that we're very
much like animals in the sense that We, we
do vary a lot in political skew and where
there is Despotism, extreme differences in power, you get
extreme differences in in family size, you get unit
guarded harems invariably, and you get lots and lots
of castrated slaves. It's a, it's a hideous picture.
It's not nothing that I was expecting, it's nothing
that I have been used to in my own
life, but it's, it's a fact of history and
prehistory is all about. Minor differences in power and
reproductive differences, and trying to get away from them.
Foragers, foragers as a rule, migrate. That's why we've
covered the earth. We've been running away from each
other. Um, YEAH, I, I, Richard Lee, who studied
the best known foragers in the last century, the
congressman of Kalahari, kept saying in his, uh, famous
book, Hunters say to hell with it, when, when
conflicts get High enough, they pick up what little
they have and vote with their feet. Foragers have
latitude to vote with their feet. And Agriculturalists, Neolithic
societies in general do not. So across the board,
agricultural societies, pre-modern agricultural societies, for instance, all of
the 1st 66 civilizations, um, were very, very sedentary,
and they were very, very unequal politically and reproductively.
I wanted to write this book because The problem
didn't become, was no longer, um, why are, why
are we Skewed like animal societies are. Why are
we so fair? The problem is Why did we
stop being unfair? What, what made us so odd?
Again, all of prehistory and all of history is
all about. Inequality and trying to avoid situations where
some big men can beat up on little men,
and big women can beat up on little women.
Why did we get to stop running away and
at the same time, Write the Declaration of Independence
and expect most people to have. A couple of
children. What, what made that happen? It's an important
question, and I've spent decades reading. Western history, mainly
because that's where the change first began, trying to
figure out. What accounts for? That's what the book
is about.
Great, and we're going to talk about that. And
in the book, you talk about human events as
competition for genetic representation in future generations. Could you
explain that?
That's pretty much what I was just talking about.
When I say um. Animals compete to reproduce. Individuals
compete to reproduce. That's exactly what they're trying to
do. They're, they have evolved to. Uh, Pass their
gametes on and, and increase their gene genetication in
future generations. That's what life is about, that's what
natural selection is about. Mhm.
And what aspects of the theory of evolution by
natural selection do you think would be important for
people to keep in mind for the kinds of
questions you explore in the book?
The, the key um refinement of the theory which
happened with the modern synthesis in the middle of
the last century. Was in understanding that selection, natural
selection is most potent at the level of the
individual, not at the level of the gene or
the individual or at the level of the group.
So individuals by and large, have evolved to compete
with each other uh than groups to compete with
each other or genes within the genome to compete
with each other. That's why we get the kinds
of societies that we see.
Mhm. And going all the way back, back to
100,000 years ago, what aspects of hunter-gatherer societies would
you highlight which you think are important for how
you present our history in your book?
Again, just touched on that previously, um. Most foraging
societies are not tied to the land. And the
20 or 300,000 year history of Homo sapiens is
a history of migration. We Start one on one
little patch and exhaust it or are exhausted by
others in our group, and we say, we have
very little to carry, we, we pick up and
we move somewhere else and we've been again, running
away from each other for as long as we've
been human, and we've populated the entire, covered the
entire earth as a result. Um, I, I want
to point out, I know you've interviewed a couple
of people like Banvi Singh and, and, uh, Luke
Levay and, um, and They're aware that in the
ethnographic record and now in the archaeological record, there,
there is evidence that In, uh, some preliterate societies,
some foraging societies, resources are good enough that, um,
migration. Go way down. Um, AND the, the, the
examples that are best known in the ethnographic record
are the Northwest coast, the US or the southwest
coast of the US where um you had tons
of marine resources and salmon runs and wild berries
and uh all kinds of resources. Clumped on Vancouver
Island or along the northwest coast, and mountain ranges
to the east and the vast ocean that you
couldn't cross to the west. So people were hemmed
in and they were very happy to be hemmed
in because the resources were enormous. So they were
foragers, they weren't Neolithic, but they were highly skewed.
You had chiefs, you had Big cedar houses with
uh one she had at least 10 wives and
um 50 slaves, mostly were captives, most of them
women, and he had sexual access to all of
them. So, all foraging societies for all of our
prehistory were probably not completely egalitarian societies, where we
found a good patch, we probably stuck on it
and um put up with a little bit of
unfairness, or sometimes a lot of unfairness.
And what is the importance of the freedom to
move, and I think we'll come back to this
topic later on in our conversation toward the end
of it. Um, I mean, in the kind of
history you present in your book, what is the
importance of this freedom to move?
Right. Well, I've already touched on that again, um.
In humans and and even in non-human societies. The
only way you escape an overlord, a dominant individual
who is taking more than his or her fair
share, is Literally by getting getting away physically. Freedom
depends on freedom to flee. But in Nonhuman societies
were. Acorn woodpeckers are defending a very, very rich
resource or naked mole rats or surrounding. A clump
of tubers surrounded by snakes in the desert. The
costs of fleeing are very, very high, and they
tend to stick where they are, and they put
up with a lot of inequality. Freedom depends on
freedom to flee, and migration has been extremely important
in human history, and extremely important in explaining why
humans have. For most of the time we've been
Homo sapiens, been an extremely egalitarian species. Mhm.
And I mean, now talking about Neolithic societies, how
is it that in those kinds of societies, little
by little, some people became celibates and others became
part of sterile casts? How do we explain that
from an evolutionary perspective?
Um, I wanna drop a name. After looking at
Um, harems, uh, looking at very, very sexy men
for a long time, again, in field work and
in the anthropological record, and, and finally in historical
societies. I sent an email or got an email
from Richard Dawkins, and he said, what happens? What
happens to everybody else? If, if, if some of
these guys are Solomons and they're collecting 1000 women
and their sons are fathering 100 children, what, what
happens, the sex ratio is going to stay at
50/50. What happens to all, all the disfranchised men?
And um I thought about that superficially. Obviously a
lot of them are gonna. The poor and die
young, and a lot of them are slaves, and
a lot of them are soldiers, but I started
to pay more attention to celibates and eunuchs, which
come up over and over again in the historical
record. And again, there are non-human parallels. There are
helpers at the nest in bird societies. They delay
reproduction and sometimes fail to reproduce altogether. Instead, they
stay on their parents' nest and they They help
the dominant animals, often related animals in that case,
to reproduce and, and forego reproduction themselves. They are
unpair bonded or unmarried or or celibate. They're not
sterile, but they're celibate. There are breeders and there
are celibates, and eventually some of the celibates inherit
or win territories by competition and become breeders. In
other animal societies, extremely social societies like the eunuchs,
or the like the social insects, sorry, you have
a king or a queen and you have a
large sterile cast, and you will approximate that even
in some mammalian societies like naked mole rats, again,
where you're clumped around patch of resources, you're surrounded
by snakes in the desert. It's very, very costly
to set off on your own and try to
start a new nest. So you stick with your
parents and your parents, your mother keeps breeding and
breeding and breeding and breeding, she'll pick. 2 or
3 partners, and the best you can hope for
is to help your siblings grow and breed or
maybe after your parents die to become a breeder
yourself. Most of the most of these naked mole
rats are members of a permanent stroll cast. So,
again, We do that too. Um, THERE are, as,
as Neo Neolithic societies grow, and again, the key
feature of Neolithic societies is sedentism is farming. Um,
You more and more of the um Of, of,
there are more and more losers. There are more
there are winners take a bigger and bigger share
of power and material resources and of reproductive resources.
You end up with harems and the and the
disfranchised males. Uh, EITHER temporarily for go reproduction and
Fail to pair bond or marry or become permanent
parts of a sterile cast. Mhm.
So, you mentioned eunuchs there, and that makes for
a great segue into my next question because I
want to delve into the Roman Empire. And my
first question about it would be, what were the
roles of eunuchs in the Roman Empire? I mean,
why did people with power at a certain point
start castrating some men?
Yeah, um. Eunuch, as you probably know, is from
the Greek for bed guard or bedroom guard. Eunuchs
started out. Making sure that Other strange men didn't
invade their women's spaces. They were. Make guards and
castrated make guards are more trustworthy than not castrated
my cards, um, so. The Romans continued a lot
of great traditions, and they had bedroom guards or
eunuchs even under the republic. Caesar had uh eunuchs
along with him when he got caught by pirates
in the Mediterranean, but the uh presence of eunuchs
amplified enormously under the empire. Um, Under the first
few emperors, they started to manage things like finances,
finance is always extremely important to a powerful man,
and then they, they had castrated men, castrated slaves,
I handle the money. Eventually, over the over the
next few centuries, eunuchs filled more and more parts
of the civil service. By the time Constantine relocated
the empire, see the empire from old Rome uh
to New Rome, which he called Cons Constantinople. Um,
Eunuchs in charge of the what he called the
sacred bed chamber. Uh, ESSENTIALLY ran both the palace
and administration of the entire empire, and they were
supported by what were referred to as swarms or
hives of uh other eunuchs who Took various positions
and still cast. In the civil service, which was
a sterile cast.
Mhm. But where did these men originate from, uh,
socially? I mean, what was their social status when
it comes to Roman society?
OK. Um, THERE is across empires in, in China.
The presence of eunuchs is, you know, thousands of
years old, um, and eventually eunuchs became so powerful,
so early that uh poor people, poor parents would
sometimes castrate their children in order to get them
into the civil service. In Rome, Rome was a
slave society, it was built on conquest and, and,
um, initially, a lot of these slaves. Became castrates,
and those are the slaves that Roman emperors used
to fill the civil service. Mhm.
Uh, SO, changing topics, I still want to keep
on the subject of the Roman Empire, but changing
topics now, from an evolutionary perspective, what does one
gain by being an emperor?
I love that question. Well, You, you want to
give it a go. Any idea what the evolutionary
advantage would be?
I mean, having access to more sexual partners,
that's pretty much it. And access to more units
to guard them and access to pretty much all
the resources in the empire and all the labor
in the empire, and, and it all got. It
it was all used to raise enormous numbers of
children.
So, was that uh also the reason why they
uh men in positions of power heard women? I
mean, why did they have concubines, for example?
They, um, concubines are are bed partners, and, uh,
absolutely, I mean. There's a new translation of Swatonius
on the bestseller lists. I don't know if you
know Swatoni. You must know Sweattoni's European. Um, HE
wrote the biographies of the first Roman emperors, the
1st 12 Roman emperors, and It's scandal from. One
page one to the last page. Um, Tonius was
a very respectable guy. He was the um Secretary
of State, literally Secretary of letters under Hadrian, who
was this early 2nd century emperor. He had access
to the imperial archives. He read through all the
personal correspondence and and state correspondences and And he,
he aired all the dirty linen. um, HE wrote
a sensational book and We all know because of
Sotones and obviously corroborated by other sources that a
lot of these 1st 12 emperors were highly promiscuous.
They had, they threw parties, uh, Tacitu says Nero
Nero threw parties in Rome as if the whole
city was his personal home. He, he'd hire prostitutes
and put them on uh on the beaches and,
and float rafts on artificial lakes and uh and
cover them with women and uh occasionally go out
at night in disguise with his friends and knock
people down and fornicate with their wives and Just
random good times. Uh, Communists hired 600 women in,
into his palace at a time, some of them
prostitutes, some of them just picked up on the
street. Tiberius sent slaves into Rome and had them.
Kidnap freeborn children who were good looking and sail
them over to Care where he had 1412 separately
named villas that he Decorated with pornographic images and
messed around with them and there were these, these
were very, very. Sexy guys. And the reason that
Petonius is free to Mhm Uh, air that line
is because all these emperors were dead. The um
the Caesars had been replaced by the Flavians and
the Flavians had been replaced by the adoptive emperors,
and Hadrian was the first one of the first
adoptive vents, emperors, he said, go ahead with Tonius.
Get into those archives and and tell those tales
so that nobody minds that we that those those
emperors are gone. Anyway, so lots lots of that
went on. We also know that The emperors put
up enormous palaces, uh. Deic, who was the last
of the Flavians lived at the end of the
first century, built what he called or what has
been called the Domus Augustana. Uh, STRETCHED along the
end one end of the circus Maximus, which is
about 6 ft fields long, so it's just. Huge,
and Plutarch and uh plenty and various other people
got to look at it. They were contemporary, and
they talked about swarms of units, and they talked
about concubines apartments, and they talked about secret bedrooms,
and so there are plenty of women in the
palace, but the big action in Rome and in
any other empire was sexual access to slaves. And
uh there were. Uh, 6 million slaves in the
Roman Empire at its height, um, the inscriptional evidence
from the tombs, the epitaph in the tombs. Suggests
that at least 1/3 of those slaves were women.
Uh, OTHER evidence from Egyptian papyri, there are bills
of sale, suggest that when a Roman went to
market to buy a slave, a slave woman, he
always picked one of reproductive age, and the median
age was right around 17. Um, Legal evidence from
the Digest. Um, LETS us know that, um, these
women were freed, rewarded with freedom if they bore
gave birth to a son, or if they gave
birth to at least 3 daughters. So that they're
picking women of reproductive age, they're paying more if
they look good, they're locking them up and, you
know, guarded. The states, country states or palaces in
the city, they have sexual access to them, lots
and lots of stories of that, and, and they
reward those women for for burying children, so that's
where most of the action was.
Uh, AND are there any other ways by which
the emperors got sexual access to women? I mean,
were they also gathering women from their war efforts?
I mean, whenever they won the war, would they
also gather more women?
Sure. I That war captives of war were the
main slaves in the Rome society was built on
uh conquest and tens of thousands of slaves would,
would come in in a single hall, and, and
they were unequally distributed. Emperors were the biggest slave
owners of all. They had. Tens of thousands of
slaves.
And how about the slaves? What did their lives
look like, look like in Roman in Roman society?
Yeah. Well, um, for most of the men, it
wasn't good. Uh, MOST male slaves ended up working
in the mines or on the farms. In the
mines, life was messy Brutus, brutish, dark, and short.
It's very, very rough life and um no women
at all. Um, Uh, ON the farms. Slave men
worked in chain gangs. And they slept in underground
cells with little slits overhead to let in light
that were. Not avail not reachable. So, as I
put it in my book, conditions not conducive to
family life. Um, MOST slave men had no reproductive
opportunities at all, but then there were some slave
men who were, um, highly educated and ended up
working in The civil service. The first, the first,
um, Civil servants were slaves. They were eventually replaced
by castrated slaves or eunuchs. So you have this
huge range from working in the mines or in
a chain gang to being a secretary of letters
or secretary of the treasury or occupying some other
civil service spot. But the vast majority would have
led miserable lives. And very very. Few reproductive opportunities.
Right, OK, for the women, we gotta talk about
slave women. SLAVE women had or not. In the
mines or or on teen gangs at all, they
tend to be. Um, They had easy jobs in
palaces or on country estates. They were. Uh, SEAMSTRESSES,
they worked in textiles, servants and serfs and slaves,
women almost always make clothes and make cloth. Um,
THEY also do. Women's jobs like uh you know
midwives and uh wet nurses and babysitters. They weren't,
they weren't physically abused and they were. Always sexually
accessible to their masters. Mhm.
So another aspect of Roman society that you talk
about in your book has to do with the
genius. What was the genius in the Roman Empire?
I mean, in what ways did households make sacrifices
to him?
Yeah. This is one of the last things I
Got to look at when I, when I, since
I started looking at Rome, and it's one of
the funnest things. um, UNDER the republic in Rome,
um, they had a tradition of families had a
tradition of making sacrifices. They set up small household
altars and make sacrifices of food or wiering and
to the potterfamilius or the ancestor who was the
head of their family or clan. And in particular,
they made sacrifices to what's called his genius, which
is a spirit that accompanies everybody. And ensures their
generative power or fertility. So they made sacrifices to
the fertility of the head of their family, or
Potterfamilius. After Augustus became the first Roman emperor. The
Senate ordered that the same sacrifices should be made.
To what was the guy who is now the.
Potter Patrie or the father of his country. So
Augustus was treated in the same way that the
father of families had previously been treated with the
added. Dimension That Subjects who failed to make those
sacrifices to the fertility or genius spirit of the
emperor. Could be beheaded if they were Roman citizens
or thrown to wild animals in the circus if
they were not. So, uh, people were tortured and
killed because they did not swear by the health
and fertility of the Roman Empire. So.
Mhm. And what happened to members of the sterile
castes after the emperors moved east?
Um, Constantine the Great in 330 AD moved from
Rome, which was Uh, more and more at risk
of being attacked by, uh, Germanic tribes to a
more secure spot on the Bosphorus, which he called
New Rome, uh, we call it Istanbul, and he
called it Constantinople after himself, and he took everything
of value with him and that included his slaves
or his eunuchs. The eunuchs. Moved to Constantinople with
the emperor and They became a larger and larger
and more and more powerful group after that.
Right. So, uh, let's not talk a little bit
about medieval Europe. In France, particularly and under the
rule of the rule of Clovis and Charlemagne, with
different kinds of roles for unmarried and celibate people
who were there?
Right. Charlemagne and Clovis and the Etonians and other
holy holy Roman emperors. Did not fill their civil
services with eunuchs. The eunuchs. WERE few and far
between after Constantine moved to see the empire to
the east. Instead, they relied on celibate or unmarried
men. Um, THOSE men or abbots and bishops and
archbishops or whatever, uh, were filled, filled all the
important spots in the civil service. And I had
a list of it on the other computer, but
I can't find it. Um, JUST, you know, all
the usual job titles, um, Chamberlain, um, Head of
the Chancery, uh, steward, uh, head of the stables,
all the major job titles were occupied by celibate,
unmarried men, um. And there were many, many with
no job titles that went along with that.
Mhm And in the medieval period, why were there
so many bastards and what happened to them?
Yeah, um, in All societies I've been talking about,
monogamy was the rule. Monogamous marriage was the rule.
Because marriage is about the inheritance of wealth, and
mating is about the inheritance of genes, and even
in the most Promiscuous polygynous societies on earth. The
rules tended to be concentrating wealth across generations, and
one of the ways you concentrate wealth is by
singling out the children of a single woman. Who
is your wife or queen as the heirs to
the bulk of your power and money. And everybody
else is by definition a bastard. So your secondary
wives and your concubines and your slaves produce non-heirs
or bastards. And so we had In Neolithic societies,
the vast majority of people were bastards. Only a
minority of people were. Born to legitimate wives, the
the the primary consort and secondary consorts gave birth
to bastards. Um, All of these slave women who
bore children to Roman emperors and other powerful Romans
gave birth to bastards. Some of those bastards did
extremely well. Many of them were freed very young
by their masters, and they were given seed money
to start. Companies or they were they had enough
connections to enter the Senate or the knighthood or
not all of them did, but there were plenty
plenty of them who did very well, and certainly
that was true in the Middle Ages as well.
Many bastards ended up with roles in the church.
And some of them ended up in the civil
service. Mhm. They didn't end up with an inheritance.
They were by definition disinherited or bastards. Mhm.
So tell us now about the women's rooms in
royal estates in medieval Europe or, I mean, I'm
not sure about the correct pronunciation of the word,
but I think it's something like guke or something
like that, so.
It's, it's pronounced in different ways. Most, most Greek
and Roman Latin words are pronounced in different ways
in English, but uh Genesia, women's women's room, GYN
for dying for women. Um Uh, THERE are women
women's rooms. On virtually every one of the country
estates owned and occasionally occupied by these medieval emperors
and kings from Clovis's lineage to Charlemagne's lineage to
the Holy Roman Emperors. They've got women in the
palace when Louis the Pious, who was Charlemagne's son.
BECAME an emperor, inherited the empire from his father.
The first thing he did was to dismiss. The
enormous crowd of women from the palace, and they
all came back. So obviously there are plenty of
women in the palace, but there are lots and
lots of women. These guys own dozens of country
estates and all of them have very, very well,
very well for fortified women's rooms where very regious,
literally, children of the king are often born.
And what were the different roles given to the
king's children? I mean, since they had so many
children, so many, particularly illegitimate children, what roles they
were given to them?
Um, A, a lot of them, like I say,
ended up in the church. Um, And Sometimes they
just got locked in the monasteries and and uh
many of these, many of these churches administered. The
estates of lords who had contributed to them. So
they raised, they raised their children and educated their
children and and raised armies for them, and they
were helpers. So, but they, but they occupied monasteries,
um, others became Landless knights, um, again, some of
them royal bastards ended up in the civil service.
And of course, if we're talking about medieval Europe,
we have also to talk about the church and
its role because it have an immense role to
play there. Uh, WHAT was the role played by
the church when it comes to dealing with celibate
and unmarried people?
The, the Middle Ages were the medieval millennium, to
me, the millennium of the Middle Ages starts with
um Constantine's. Conversion to Christianity and emancipation of the
Roman Church, and it ends pretty much with, with
the crusades and and the heresies and that that
incurred clerical celibacy and finally the Reformation. So the
medieval millennium was a Catholic millennium and the core.
Uh, THE most important aspect of Catholicism was Commitment
to celibacy. WAS was a commitment that these younger
sons and daughters and bastard sons and daughters were
not to inherit and uh had a place to
live and work, and and that was in the
Catholic Church. Mhm.
So would some of these people go, for example,
to monasteries as
monks. Parents donated their younger sons and daughters, and
sometimes they're bastards illegitimate, so not legitimate and ultimate
to monasteries at the age of weaning. They were
called oblates or gifts. They were taken to the
monastery door and signed a contract and promised to
be celibate for the rest of. The lives and.
Uh, SO, apart from that in medieval Europe, what
did the Crusades represent?
All right. Um, THE crusades brought the whole thing
down. Or started the process, um. Uh, In 1095,
the Pope Urban the Second, who had been appealed
to by the eastern emperor for help fighting off
the infidel. Uh, GAVE a speech to an enormous
crowd of people in a field outside of Claremont,
France. And he said, the land you inhabit is
overcrowded. You're fighting for everything. What you need to
do is head east toward the land of milk
and honey, the land of our ancestors in Jerusalem,
and fight off the infidel and settle there. And
that's what they did. Uh, ALL sorts of landless,
uh, knights, uh, landless younger sons who are destined
for the church, and, and poor men got on
their horses and put on their boots and marched
off to the east and fought horrible, hideous, bloody
wars. And one enough of them that they took
over the Levant, they, they established a crusader state
in Jerusalem and in Odessa in Tripoli and and
in Antioch, and they settled down for generations on
plots of their own land with their own legitimate
wives and their own legitimate children and grandchildren. And
then the crusader states were lost, but eventually there
was also a Latin Empire and Constantinople, but by
then, there was an enormous network of trade across
the Mediterranean. People had found different ways to make
a living. They were, they were getting rich in
movables as opposed to immovable goods that affected the
growth of of parliaments of the House of Commons.
And it gave younger sons and daughters options. To
make a living. That they hadn't had. So, heresies
came in as soon as the crusades began, all
through the 12th century, there were heretics, one here
one heresy after another, and many of them insisted
on an end to celibacy. And the more prominent
heresy started in the 14th century with Wycliffe at
Oxford, and then John Huss at Prague. Key features
in their, in their arguments involved getting rid of
clerical celibacy and then finally Martin Luther in 1517,
exactly 25 years after we started moving to the
west instead of the east and setting up colonies
in, in the Americas. 25 years after Columbus made
landfall in the Bahamas, Martin Luther posted the 95
theses to the door of the Wittenberg Church and
said, that's enough, Pope, and started writing essays on
the Pope had no more power to prohibit marriage
than he had to prohibit. Indigestion or getting fat.
And Uh, the monastery started emptying out immediately. Luther
got married and had 6 children, and his old
black monastery turned into his family manor. Um, OTHER,
other monks followed suit, and other reformers in Switzerland
and Cal Calvin originally in France later in Switzerland.
Insisted on clerical marriage and that became the rule
in the Reformation.
Mhm. Yeah, so we're going to talk a little
bit more about the Reformation and also about migration
and colonization in a bit, but just before that,
what does the Magna Carta in 1254 mark in
history and particularly the history of England?
12:15. And um, The Magna Carta was an agreement
between King John and 25 of his leading barons,
and it promised A number of guarantees of baronial
rights. The most important was no taxation without representation.
If you want dues from us, you've got to
invite us to a council, and we will tell
you what we want done with this money. Um,
UNDER John's son, Henry the 3rd, who succeeded at
the age of 9. The very, very first sets
of. Uh, COMMERCE, knights and burgesses or, or uh
citizens were invited to come to Westminster as well,
and they too reissued Magna Carta and ordered that
there would be no taxation without being summoned to
parliament without representation about and, and a voice in
how that money was to be spent. Uh, AS
the commons grew. Uh, IN wealth, as movable money
became more and more available, they grew in power
and their voice. Their voice got louder. Eventually they
started opposing the kings that they didn't like. They
deposed Edward the 2nd in 1327, and then Richard
the 2nd in 1399, and Henry the Sixth in
in the 15th century, and finally they cut off
the head of a king they really didn't like,
and that was sort of the end of kings.
And how did the rise of parliament occur in
England?
Again, it was, it was about, it was mainly
about mostly about the growth of movable wealth instead
of just getting money for their wars and other
royal business from landed. Barons, the landed aristocracy, Kings
started to have to appeal to people who dealt
in mable goods, tradesmen. And uh Manufacturers to and
and they became the House of Commons, and they
got more and more power over royal decisions and
over national decisions as they got wealthier and wealthier.
So let me ask you one more question about
England before we move on to other topics, uh,
that is along the same lines of questions I
asked you about the Roman Empire and medieval Europe.
So tell us about how for centuries, well to
do men uh in England filled their households with
unmarried women, had sex with them, and sometimes got
them husbands and how they treated their husbands.
Right. Well, like I said in, in Rome, most
of the action in, in reproduction was sex with
slaves. In the Middle Ages, sex with certs, in
modern societies, sex with servants. They're all the same
people, but they're more and more emancipated. So, In
England, they had what was called life cycle service.
As many as 60% of the population of adolescents
aged 15 to 25. WERE working as servants in
the houses of their superiors of richer people. And
the women. TENDED to be uh victims of sexual
predators. They Like, like slave owners in Rome, um,
serving. Owners in in England tended to have sex
with their young female servants, and when they got
them pregnant, They would frequently find them a husband,
sometimes they would um hooked them up with another
one of their servants, a male servants, sometimes someone
else they knew someone they did business with. Arrange
a marriage and and that bastard be would be
taken care of. Mhm.
And sometimes they gave promotions to their husbands,
correct? That is correct. Um. All this stuff got
blown wide open in the literature in the in
in the literature of uh. 17th, 18th, 19th century
England and then on the continent, um. The confessional
literature, Samuel Pete's, I don't know if you've read
Pete's diaries, they're terrifically entertaining. He wrote just after
the English Revolution. And peeps like most other men
of his time, had trouble keeping his hands off
his maids. When he got them pregnant, he tried
to find them husbands. When he was interested in
a woman whose husband was in his employ. He
would have sex with that woman and give the
husband promotions. So they tried to get women husbands,
and they tried to get uh women who were
married, uh, they had tried to get the husband's
promotions. Peeps, Peeps is probably the best source cause
it's all in his very own words and he's
not lying, he's he's keeping this information in a
drawer. Um, Boswell, a century later, um, put it
all down in a series of journals and He
too was very guilty, but he, he, he made
the same sorts of arrangements. Uh, THE first English
novels were written by Dan Defoe, and they included
Roxanna and Moll Flanders. They're all about girls who
got knocked up by their masters, their master's sons,
and pawned off on younger sons or on friends
and poor farmers and uh. The masters were relieved
of the of the burden of raising their bastards.
Uh, THE same is true of opera. I I
um wanted to play. A little, oh God, do
I have here? Yes, I do. Do you mind
if I play a little music for you? No,
yes, who is? I'm gonna play you a little
off. I'm, I know that because you are. Iberian,
you're gonna know right away what this is. Are
you ready? I hope it comes through. It's on
my phone. Turn it up. It Good. I don't
I didn't take them to any of them.
Oh, I'm sorry, but I'm not hearing it very
well. It's not coming through very well,
so. You know what is. 10003. The number of
lovers Don Juan had in Spain. That's Mozartstone one,
the libretto by Du Pont. And it, it's, uh,
that opera is all about a libertine who gets
dragged into hell in the end, because his servant,
Leparrello, like servants of Don Juan since the early
17th century when Molina in Spain wrote the first
version, were fed up. Stop molesting every woman in
Europe. Stop molesting every woman in Spain. If you
continue to do that, we're going to drag you
into hell or make sure that you are dragged
into some kind of hell. The the audience that
was Sitting in Molina's uh auditorium or reading uh
Moliere or listening to Mozart's opera was no longer
just an a landed aristocracy. These were people who,
who were making their living in in trade and
people who were sick and tired of the old
aristocracy and the liberties they took with women. And
this, this motif was the most, it took over
Europe. It was in everything from puppet shows to
to plays to operas, um. So anyway, uh, attitudes
changed, and at the same time, opportunities evaporated, um,
household size collapsed. So people stopped living as servants
during this critical period as adolescents, um. There's a
group called the Cambridge Group for the History of
Population and Social Structure. And when computers became available
at the end of the last century, they digitized
all the old parish records, and they found that
There are as many as 60 servants in England.
Per 100 households in At the time of the
English Revolution in 1650. Just normal, everybody's in service.
All the young women are in the households of
their betters. 100 years later, that number had dropped
to 45, and by 1947, it was down to
2. It just, it just evaporated. So those men
and those women had better things to do than
to wait tables for the local baron. That those
opportunities evaporated. And, and so reproductive differentials declined.
So perhaps related to that we've been talking a
lot about promiscuity among European aristocracy. So I mean,
was that one of the ways that a decline
in promiscuity occurred in Europe over time?
Yes, households shrunk, households got smaller and the um
young women who waited on these wealthy men were
gone. Um, And again, attitudes changed. Everybody loved the
on one places because people, people had low tolerance
for those kinds of infidelities. It was OK once.
It was taken for granted pretty much, but The
citizens, members of the Household Commons wanted, don't want
to be right into hell.
So, uh, but then let me ask you about
the celibacy. When and why did people eventually start
writing and talking against celibacy?
Again, that the heresies grew with the crusades. As
um people had options to emigrate more often younger
sons had more options to emigrate and find lands
of their own, and more importantly, trade grew. So,
um, younger sons had options to make a living
that didn't involve inheriting parcels of land from their
parents, and If younger sons would make a living.
And didn't have to depend on The resources of
the church, then they could afford to support a
wife, and they didn't have to be celibate anymore.
Mhm.
And what, OK, then you've already mentioned a little
bit the role played by the Reformation and what
happened during the Reformation, but, uh, what was the
role played by it and the the Protestants more
generally against celibacy? The
Protestants,
yeah, the Protestants,
yeah. Uh, THE Protestants were the last heretics, right?
Like I said, as soon as the, as the,
the crusades were preached in 1095. So at the
very end of the 11th century. The 12th century
was the 1st century of. Massive numbers of heresies.
They, um, the, the crusaders went east and started
started occupying these crusader states and and Trade grew
and and all these heretics are saying, let's get,
let's get rid of clerical celibacy. We shouldn't insist
on celibacy anymore. And then Uh, more serious heretics
like John Wycliffe at Oxford and John Husset in
Prague, and then eventually Martin Luther started saying the
same thing. And Luther, again 25 years after Columbus,
posted the 95 theses to the door of the
Wittenberg Church and said, that's it. We've broken with
the pope, and we're going to take wives, and
he took, took a wife and Zingly took a
wife and Calvin took a wife, and the monasteries
evaporated.
So, and uh this is also something you've alluded
to earlier. What happened after 1492 and what was
the role played by colonization and migration?
Um, Again, For Homo sapiens, as for naked mole
rats and communally living birds. Uh The way that
you escape. Being a subject, the way that you
get away from an overall overlord is by literally
Having freedom to move, if you can find a
new territory and build your own nest. Uh, THEN
you can, you can have your own family and
not, not be, uh, exploited. Freedom depends on freedom
to move, so the crusades started the movement towards,
uh, politically, politically equality, economic equality, and religious equality.
And uh all of those. All of those collapsing
movements accelerated with the movement west towards the Americas
where colonization took off. By the time of the
English revolution, or the American Revolution. There are millions
of colonists, mostly of British descent, living in North
America, and in the Crusader states it then. 10s
of thousands So, the opportunities to take off, to
literally run away from all of this political, economic,
and religious unfairness, expanded, exploded. And the result was
a collapse in kingdoms and empires. In 1649, the
House of Commons set up a high court of
justice to Judge King Charles the First. And they
said they accused him of Looking after his own
personal self-interest and the self-interest of his family members
at the expense of the good people of this
nation. That's that's the story of history. And they
said, cancel it. All men were created equal. It,
we just, we just flipped the script completely back
to the beginning and started to look like forging
societies, but we suddenly had millions of people, but
we were hugely mobile. We were moving around like
crazy and goods were moving. As long as people
and goods are flowing freely. We are free.
Uh, BY free, uh, I mean, does that also
entail that there's less inequality.
That's what I mean, yeah, free to get away
from an overlord, free to get away from exploitation.
Mhm.
So those were the kinds of societal changes brought
about by migration to the Americas,
right? Yes, it started again with there was a
significant movement east with the Crusades, but Immigration exploded
with migration to the Americas. Mhm.
So, uh, let me ask you then, what does
what you present in the book tell us about
the history of inequality? Why is it so common
inequality, particularly in agricultural societies?
Um, INEQUALITY. Tends tends to be a feature of
sedentary societies again across species, across and across human
history and prehistory. When you are stuck in one
place because of geographical barriers to flight or because
the resources are so rich that it's too expensive
to leave. You you put up with inequality because
it's better than leaving a rich patch for dirt.
Mm. Um, YOU don't want to starve on the
desert, you want to stay in the oasis, so
you, you put up with a smaller slice of
the pie as long to the extent that barriers,
those barriers open up, um. There's there's going to
be a more equal equal distribution of wealth, power,
and uh ultimately of reproduction.
Right. So let me ask you one last question
then, and it's about monogamy. Does monogamy play a
role in the the history you present in your
book? Is it associated with, for example, more equal
sexual access in society and with more general equality
in human societies?
Um, I want to again. Emphasize that there's a
difference between monogamous marriage and monogamous mating. Uh, MANY
people confuse them, and they're very different, um. Uh,
EXTREMELY unequal societies practice monogamy. Kings are very concerned
about leaving their emperor their kingdom to just one
son, and lords leaving the castle to just one
heir. So monogamous marriage is a feature of extremely
Promiscuous and polygynous societies. But monogamous mating. Everybody has
an opportunity to have a parcel of land and
a vote in parliament and a legitimate family. That
that coincides with Mobility. That's an effective mobility.
Mhm. And so monogamy actually plays an important role
here, right in, uh, leading to more equal societies.
Yes. Political Economic and reproductive equality coincide and in
Darwinian terms. If you're, if the end you have
evolved to strive for is genetic representation in later
generations, the resources and the power are means to
those ends. The reason men strive to accumulate resources,
and the reason they strive to accumulate power is
ultimately in order to get access to breeding women
who will raise large numbers of children. Mhm.
Great. So, the book is again the Badge of
Lost innocence, a History of the West. Uh, APART
from the book, Doctor Betsy, where can people find
your work on the internet?
Um, I have a website and you can look
at Google Scholar. I've got lots of papers up
and be happy people read them.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
very fascinating conversation. It was
an honor and a pleasure. Thanks, Ricardo. Appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick Punteran
Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary Galman
Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelitsky,
Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff McMahon,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin. And yoursnacht,
a special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon,
Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.